---
layout: post
title: VEOS 2.0.1 glibc Update
author: Erich Focht
excerpt: "Updating VEOS to the glibc based 2.0.1 (and later) version from the online yum repository."
category: posts
comments: true
tags: [veos, admin, repository, yum, sxaurora, vector]
---

*Erich Focht*

With VEOS 2.0.1 published mid January 2019 we finally get glibc
support for VE programs. The glibc based environment should bring some
benefits, it is more compatible to Linux and has better and more
configurable memory management. We wanted to have glibc right from the
start but it turned out that the code was so full of GNU-isms, that
*ncc* could simply not compile it (and it is in good company with other
great compilers). A purely scalar *gcc* port does the job now.

*musl-libc* based setups will be supported only until March 2019. You
will need to recompile your codes after switching to the glibc
environment.

VEOS 2.0.1 is only supporting glibc on Centos/RHEL 7.5
installations. Older versions (7.3/7.4) will get glibc support in VEOS
2.0.2 which will be released in February. So if you want to switch now
to glibc, you must update to Centos/RHEL 7.5!

The VEOS yum repositories announced in [this
post](https://sx-aurora.github.io/posts/VEOS-yum-repository) have been
updated to include the VEOS 2.0.1 packages. You can now easily update
from there. This post will repeat some of the steps in that post, for
the sake of completeness.


## PREPARATION

Make sure you have the public GPG key for VE software imported:

```
rpm --import https://sx-aurora.com/repos/vesw.public.key
rpm --import https://sx-aurora.com/repos/RPM-GPG-KEY-TSUBASA-soft
```

Replace your yum repository configurations for VEOS (mostly local
repository possibly called /etc/yum.repos.d/TSUBASA-local.repo) by
following two repository configuration files:

*/etc/yum.repos.d/veos-common.repo*:
```
[veos-common]
name=Aurora VEOS Common
baseurl=https://sx-aurora.com/repos/veos/common
gpgcheck=1
enabled=1
```

*/etc/yum.repos.d/veos-rhel7.repo*:
```
[veos-rhel7]
name=Aurora VEOS RHEL Specific
baseurl=https://sx-aurora.com/repos/veos/RHEL7.5
gpgcheck=1
enabled=1
```

In the later repo config comment/uncomment the baseurl that
corresponds to your variant of RHEL7 or CentOS7.

You should have access to a repository that contains the updated
versions of the proprietary packages like SDK, compilers, MPI, NQSV,
etc that are adapted to glibc-ve. This can be a local repository, on
the same machine, or remote. Please ask your support contact at NEC in
case you are not sure or did not receive the updated SDK, yet. The
following steps imply that you have a yum repository configuration
that points to an updated SDK packages repository.


## UPDATING

The steps described below are following the [Installation
Manual](https://www.nec.com/en/global/prod/hpc/aurora/document/InstallationGuide_E.pdf).

### Take the VE cards into maintenance mode
```
/opt/nec/ve/bin/vecmd state set off
/opt/nec/ve/bin/vecmd state set mnt
```

### Stop VEOS, Monitoring and MMM
```
systemctl stop vemmd
/opt/nec/ve/veos/sbin/terminate-all-veos
systemctl stop mmm
rmmod ve_drv
rmmod vp
```

### Update VEOS

If you are using Infiniband on your system for MPI involving Vector
Engines, you must have installed the Mellanox OFED package as well as
*ve_peermem*. You will need to deinstall both before doing the update:

```
yum remove ve_peermem
/usr/sbin/ofed_uninstall.sh
```

Now proceed to update VEOS (and possibly CentOS/RHEL 7.5):

```
yum update

# make sure glibc-ve is installed
yum install glibc-ve glibc-ve-devel
```

Install the new, glibc based compilers:
```
yum remove nec-nc++-musl-inst-1.6.0 nec-nfort-musl-inst-1.6.0
yum install nec-nc++-2.0.8 nec-nfort-2.0.8 nec-nc++-inst-2.0.8 nec-nfort-inst-2.0.8
```

On some systems we had to make sure some RPMs are installed (dependencies are maybe not complete):
```
yum install libgcc-ve-static libsysve-devel veos-devel
```

Reboot the system and wait for the nodes to come online.


### Install MOFED, if needed

If you were using Infiniband before and had to deinstall Mellanox
OFED, you must install now the appropriate version. From
[http://www.mellanox.com/page/products_dyn?product_family=26](http://www.mellanox.com/page/products_dyn?product_family=26)
download "Mellanox OFED 4.3-3.0.2.1", the tarball, not the ISO.

Untar the tarball, enter the directory and type:
```
./mlnxofedinstall --add-kernel-support --kmp
```

Install the *ve_peermem* package that manages memory mappings between IB cards and VEs.
```
yum install ve_peermem
```


### Update VMC Firmware

If the *vmcfw* package was updated it is recommended to update the VMC
firmware of the VE card. The VE's FW version can be checked with the command:
```
/opt/nec/ve/bin/vecmd info | grep VMCFW
```

If the version differs from the version of the *vmcfw* RPM, the VE's
FW should be updated while the cards are in maintenance mode and the
VEOS related services are still stopped. The procedure is simple, but
make sure the updating command is issued from within the directory
containing the firmware:

```
cd /etc/opt/nec/ve/mmm/vmc

/opt/nec/ve/bin/vecmd state set off
/opt/nec/ve/bin/vecmd state set mnt
systemctl stop ve-os-state-monitor@*.service ve-os-launcher@*.service ve-ived

/opt/nec/ve/bin/vecmd fwup vmc aurora_MK10.bin
```

Reboot the VH after a FW upgrade.


### Bring VE cards back online

If Infiniband for SX-Aurora TSUBASA is installed on the system:
```
systemctl start vemmd
```

Then load the VE driver kernel module and start MMM:
```
modprobe ve_drv
systemctl start mmm
```

Or reboot the system.


---

[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SX-Aurora_TSUBASA)
